1 Introduction


1.1 History of the law

On  August  18, 2000  the  Italian  parliament  has launched  the  law
248/2000, known as the "stamp  law", going to modify law 633/1941 that
describes the norms of copyright protection in Italy.  This law, being
by  now quite  old,  had  already been  modified  other times,  trying
gradually to adapt it to the new scene changes. In particular with the
law 518/1992  the defense  of the copyright  (and software,  also) had
been  extended, framing  it  like  "work of  the  talent" like  music,
literary and artistic works.

Also this modification  has a long history, since  four years has been
necessary to the parliament in order to arrive to the final approval.

The  complete  text of  the  new law  n.248/00  and  the previous  one
n.663/41 can be found respectively on:

     http://www.interlex.it/testi/l00_248.htm
     http://www.interlex.it/testi/l41_633.htm


1.2 The role of SIAE

In Italy the defense of the  copyright has a long history, in which it
has  always carried  out a  SIAE  prominent role,  Italian Society  of
Authors  and Editors,  founded in  the  1882 from  famous people  like
Giuseppe  Verdi:  this organization  has  always  been  acting like  a
private organism that defends the  rights and the interests of the his
associates.

Since post-war this association carries  out an activity of control of
the application of the law  in collaboration with the police corps (1)
that  have these  tasks, both  for live  shows  (concerts, extensions,
cinema tickets) and for distribution  of copies for "works of talent",
like music CDs, books and software.

This last kind of control is held by the application, by distributors,
of adhesive  "stamps", that  must be attached  on all  the distributed
copies,  stamps that  must be  bought from  the SIAE  directly  by the
distributor,  at the  cost of  approximately 100  Liras (approximately
1/20 Euro).

The lack or the faking of  this stamps involves the non-legal state of
the copy, and therefore his distribution becomes a crime.

Therefore, although  the registration to this  organization (SIAE) has
never  been mandatory for  anyone, if  an author  wants to  enjoy fund
raising from the distribution of his own work he must necessarily join
the SIAE.

In truth  the distribution of  these funds happens  nearly exclusively
for the great distributors like music majors, since small distributors
rarely  collects,  also  because  the SIAE  has  remarkable  financial
difficulties from many years (they are under controlled administration
from several years).

The collaboration  with the police happens by  denunciations of faking
cases and of distribution without the stamps.



2 The text of the law


2.1 What's news of this law

What has been written in the  new law, that has provoked such alarmism
in all Italy?

These are  the modifications that  have raised the perplexity  of many
observators and students of penal and civil jurisprudence:


2.1.1 Penal crimes

In first  place the crimes connected  to the trasgressions  of the law
have  been transform  from  administrative crimes  (since usually  the
don't create social alarm) in penitentiaries (2) (See article 171-bis,
codicil 1).

In many  legal environments  attention has been  raised since  this is
truly an excess,  inasmuch as with a crime stated in  this law you can
have three years of jail, like for a homicide.
 

2.1.2 Pentitism

Other strange point of this law, extremely controversial and contested
from Italian legal studies, is the institution of a generic pentitism:
in article 17 is declared  that "the punishment...  is diminished from
a third to  one half and the accessory punishments  are not applied to
who...  or,  supplying all the  information in its  possession, allows
the individuation of the organizer of the illicit activity of which to
articles  171-ter and 171-quater,  of any  other duplicators  or other
distributor, that  is the  seizure of remarkable  amounts phonographic
and  audio-video  supports  or  of  instruments  or  material  used  o
assiegned to  the commission of  the crimes".  So, to  have punishment
reductions   is  sufficient   to  make   to  seize   other  materials,
indipendently  from the final  outcome of  the facts,  without waiting
that there'll be a definitive sentence of who has been denounced.


2.1.3 Prohibition of copy

An other extremely controversial point is the one that establishes how
to  prevent  the  distribution   of  "illegal  copies",  i.e.   copies
distributed  without giving  to  the copyright  holders  the money  he
requested. This is the point  that the Italian Free Software community
is  interested in,  and  in general  all  those who  are  in some  way
interested to a greater distribution of software through channels that
does not involve a commercial transaction. 


What has been  indicated is much simple in the  view of the legislator
since  is has  an  extension to  what  is already  made  in place  for
literature and music. All media containing software copies must have a
SIAE stamp on it, regardless of the fact that it involved a commercial
transaction  or not.  Even the  emergency  floppy used  to reboot  the
operating system has to comply to this rule.

This stamp  must be acquired by  the owner of the  media directly from
the SIAE and attached on the media.

For   a  detailed   description   of   what  you   have   to  do   see
http://www.softwarelibero.org/docs/siae.shtml

As it is easy to understand,  no distinction has been made between the
various  kind of  software  distribution that  exist  nowadays in  the
world. In particular no consideration have been taken for that kind of
distribution that  not necessarily involve the exchange  of money when
the user receives the software.   Reality like Free Software, but also
freeware, public domain and all the other kind of distribution, by now
much diffused of the Internet, are under an attack. 

Moreover, another serious problem is  the terminology used in the text
of he  law: software is always  designated by the  word "program". The
wording  of the  law  is not  problematic  when a  single software  is
distributed on  a media.  However,  it introduces an ambiguity  in the
case  where many  software are  distributed  on the  same media.   For
instance  the law could  very well  be interpreted  to mean  that each
GNU/Linux  distribution would require  one stamp  for each  package it
contains.


2.1.4 Lucro (*) and profit

Another  extremely dangerous  modification introduced  in this  law is
that one related to the modification of the paragraph "for lucro" with
"for profit".

In Italian,  but above  all in  the legal jargon,  the two  words have
little different meanings:

- lucro  is  a  "exclusively  a  patrimonial gain  consisting  in  the
  acquisition of one or more assets";

- profit instead is a more wider term.

With the old  text of law the authorized copies made  for an only home
use were not  illegal, because they had not been not  made in order to
earn money  or other;  in fact  they have been  sentences in  favor of
persons who had  copied software illegally for personal  use only (see
as     an     example     the     sentence     brought     back     on
http://www.interlex.it/testi/to000420.htm)    and    therefore    this
interpretation already had entered in the jurisprudence.

With the  new law,  these also become  illegale since  someone copying
"have a gain in how much he don't spend in order to buy the licences".


2.1.5 The rest

Beyond to these modifications,  that regard more closely the software,
many  other are  related  to  photocopies of  books,  the exchange  of
information on  the operation of systems that  codifies radio signals,
on the  seizure of the personal  computers in case  of inquiry.  These
were wide criticized but that this occasion intentionally we omit: for
a  panoramic   one  you  see   the  one  situated  on   ALCEI  website
(http://www.alcei.it).


2.2 Implementing regulation (3)

The actual  implementation of the law  is far from  clear.  During the
convention  in Rome  (see below  for more),  organized from  the Linux
Users Group  of Rome, both  Mr.  Agoglia, responsible  for legislative
transactions of the  SIAE, both the reporter of  the law senator Altea
have demonstrated not to have understood nothing of that Free Software
is and all  the kind of not-for-profit software  exchange, but also as
they think to  implement in real life this new  law. For example, when
it has been pointed out from  the participations, that the text of the
law it would impose, for example, to stick the stamps also on the hard
disks  and other  paradoxical situations,  they were  puzzled  up, and
claimed that the  "implementing regulation" will be the  source of all
the solutions to address this problems.

The text of the law has sent back the writing of this regulation to an
appropriate commission and it was  susposed to be published within six
months. This gap of  time is by now expired in March  of this year but
only now  we have the first previews  on the content (you  can see the
article     on     Punto    Informatico     as     an    example     -
http://www.punto-informatico.it/p.asp?i=35930).

Working just on these indiscretions,  our comment cannot once again be
other  that negative: indeed  from what  we have  been told  about the
regulation,  written  up  in  first  person from  the  judge  Giuseppe
Corasaniti,  teacher at  the  Luiss University  (a private  university
specialized  in jurisprudence),  the stamp  will not  be  mandatory in
these cases only:

- software distributed free of  charge.  Evidently this exclusion does
  not favor for Free Software because this can be distributed also for
  charge from who's  not the copyright holder, without  that he enters
  in some way in the transaction;

- necessary software required for professionals;

- preinstalled software  on computers for sale.   This exclusion seems
  to be  made on  purpose for the  computer vendors, by  now regularly
  sold  with Operating  System  installed, allowing  therefore to  the
  vendors to avoid  the task of the stamp application.   We do not see
  any other reasons for this exclusion;

- software installed on some  professional machines and dipendent from
  these.



3 Thing has been said and made regarding to this law


3.1 Pro

- The SIAE since  it has found widens his  own powers and competences,
  in  a  extremely  important  field  like  the  distribution  of  the
  software;

- The BSA,  Businness Alliance Software  (http://www.bsa.org), Italian
  section, distributed on their web site, for a long time, a text that
  explained the "improvements" of this law.  This organization unifies
  the largest  international software houses and  this satisfaction is
  proof  enough to  think reasonably  that  the law  has been  written
  according much attention to their requests.

Beyond  these  two  "official"  positions,  many  articles  have  been
published on several newspapers  and magazines, articles in which they
boasted the  fact that finally  also Italy has  a new defense  for the
copyright.  Only  a few articles outlined  the risks of  this new law,
leaving this  task to the initiative  of the groups that  I'm going to
list here.



3.2 Against


3.2.1 Assoli

Let's start from the last one,  since Assoli was born just in November
2000. 

Assoli has conducted a research  (published February 2, 2001) in order
to clearify how the text of  the law must be interpreted and which are
the  consequences;  this research  has  been  carried  out by  talking
directly  to what  would be  logical to  be the  best sources  to gain
informations: the  Finance Police,  the SIAE, magistrates  and lawyers
who  work  in  the  field  of  the copyright.   The  result  has  been
disappointing and has  left us more questions and  perplexity than how
many it has  succeeded to solve before.  The text  of this research is
published    at   http://www.softwarelibero.org/docs/siae.shtml   (and
http://www.softwarelibero.org/docs/siae-en.shtml   for   the   English
version).

Subsequently, on March 5, 2001 Assoli has asked clearness directly and
officially     to     the     SIAE     with     an     letter     (see
http://www.softwarelibero.it/docs/lettsiae.shtml),  send  beyond  that
organization to many  Italian mailing lists and to  printed and online
magazines.   This   letter  has  had  a   remarkable  impact  creating
discussions and  interesting articles but  the same cannot be  said of
the      answer       received      from      the       SIAE      (see
http://www.softwarelibero.it/docs/risposta-siae.shtml), since this did
not answer to any of the  points raised in Assoli's letter, being only
a  pure  formality  and   demonstrating  at  the  end  the  remarkable
embarrassment  about this  argument.  To  this "no-answer"  Assoli has
sent                  a                  comment                  (see
http://www.softwarelibero.it/docs/risposta-a-siae.shtml).

In addition Assoli  published several articles which you  can found on
our website.


3.2.2 ALCEI

ALCEI (http://www.alcei.it) is  the organization representing in Italy
the Electronic  Frontier Foundation, with a long  history of interests
and fights for all that regards the defense of the civil and political
rights on the  Internet.  Perhaps ALCEI has been  the first to explain
the  dangers of  this  new law,  having  followed the  issue from  the
beginning. Their  work can be  found on several articles  published on
their         web        site        (see,         for        example,
http://www.alcei.it/921229_decreto.html                             and
http://www.alcei.it/cs000725.html).

An   interesting  and   provocative  initiative   has  been   doing  a
presentation  in  some  powers  of  attorney of  a  denunciation  (see
http://www.alcei.it/bollino.html) on  the presence in  many commercial
software on sale without the aforesaid stamps. 


3.2.3 Rome Linux User Group 

On  April  20, 2001  at  the  faculty La  Sapienza  of  Rome has  been
organized  a public  debate with  the title  "Open Source  Licenses in
Italy   and  in   Europe",   by   the  Linux   User   Group  of   Rome
(http://www.lugroma.org).  This  debate  has  revealed  to  be  really
important  above  all for  the  partecipation  of  a SIAE  legislative
officer  Mr. Agoglia  and of  the reporter  or the  law  Honour Altea,
speaking in  front of a huge  public, made of  members of associations
and  groups   who  works  on  copyright,  along   with  Free  Software
enthusiasts. 

During the debate Dr. Agoglia and  Mr. Altea have tried to explain the
reasons of the  law, but being in contrast  wiith all the observations
made by the others people officially invited to the debate (Alessandro
Rubini from  Project GNU and  Andrea Monti the ALCEI  president, among
others) and with the strong contrast of all the public.  

See  also  http://www.lugroma.org/press.php3?azione=comunicato_dib for
the official  paper published  at the end  of the convention  and also
http://www.lugroma.org/press.php3?azione=dibattito       for       the
announcement of the debate.


3.2.4 LOA, HackLab in Milan

The first public  initiative of which we know about  was held in Milan
on  January   12  and  13,  2001   by  the  local   hacklab,  the  Loa
(http://www.ecn.org/loa).  The  goals of the initiative  (you can find
the                           announcement                          on
http://www.ecn.org/loa/web/iniziative/diritti/gnuecon.html#programma)
was  originally  not  focused only  on  the  new  law  but more  on  a
generalized discussion about the  difficulties that the new modalities
of  exchanging knowledge  address, typical  of the  Internet.  But the
issue of the new law becamed the main theme of the debate.

To the end of the two days of debate two initiatives were proposed:

- the first one very provocative  was to propose the dissemination, in
  music stores,  libraries, and software stores  of "modified" version
  of  the SIAE  stamps, version  that  was possible  to download  from
  http://www.ecn.org/loa/web/locandine/nosiae_loa.jpg.gz;

- the  other  one  was  that   one  of  announce  a  "netstrike"  (see
  http://www.netstrike.it)   against  the  web   site  of   the  SIAE,
  initiative held on January 15,  2001, with a remarkable success. See
  also http://www.ecn.org/loa/web/iniziative/diritti/nosiae.php


3.2.5 A proposal to modify the law from senators Semenzato and Pieroni

The  two senators  have proposed  a modification  to the  text  of law
248/2000                                                          (see
http://www.softwarelibero.it/altri/semenzato-pieroni.shtml),   but  in
truth it  has only  goal to  restore the indication  of the  "scopo di
lucro" rather than that one to the profit.

The other  goal was what the  thing had been  introduced directly from
two senators:  unfortunately with the  new elections the party  of the
Greens, which Semenzato  and Pieroni belonged to, is  now missing from
the  parliament and  we do  not  know the  electoral fate  of the  two
senators;  in  the case  that  they are  not  there  anymore it  seems
improbable that their proposal can have some end. 


3.2.6 The rest of the world

Beyond to  these initiatives  the negative reactions  to this  law has
been much diffuse above all in  the world of Italian Linux Users Group
and  generally abroad  all  the  groups interested  to  the civil  and
political rights on the Internet, reactions that have been esplicitate
on the several mailing lists. 

See    as    an   example    the    list    cyber-rights   from    ecn
(http://www.ecn.org/lists/cyber-rights) and the  list dedicated to the
organization of the HackMeeting (http://www.ecn.org/lists/hackit99). 



4 Which have been the ways and the reasons of this law

The reasons of this law can be characterized in two great meanings:

- the ignorance of the Italian  legislators, which many times in other
  situations have clearly demonstrated their little (or any) knowledge
  about the dynamics that guide the Internet, the economy and the ways
  with this environment is managed.   Adding to this the fact that for
  this law, between the first  discussion and its approval, four years
  have  been  necessary, during  which  the  Internet  has assumed  an
  importance maybe  not expectable we understand how  they developed a
  such poor and mistaken law. 

- the  powerful  lobby (explicitly  declared  from  Agoglia and  Altea
  during  the debate of  Rome (4))  of the  great corporations  of the
  software, represented  from BSA.  With this  law these organizations
  have  solved their  necessity  to control  the  distribution of  the
  software,  making it extremely  complex for  the small  companis and
  groups like the one in Italy based of Free Software. Their main idea
  has been  the one to made  the copy of the  software illegal, always
  and   however,  independently   from  the   terms  of   the  several
  licences. In fact it's undeniable that the affixing of the stamps is
  usefully usefully for proprietary  and commercial licences (a box, a
  product,  a  contract)  and  instead  leaves out  all  the  software
  distributed in  different terms, like  on the Internet  or amatorial
  diffusion.  Like it has been  made with music, whose distribution is
  by  now strongely and  completely manage  by the  majors (or  it was
  until  Napster and  its clones  appeared, explaing  the  great fight
  against these?),  so they  want to do  with the software,  making it
  "legal"  the only one  created, but  above all  distributed, through
  commercial channels.  All the other kind of distribution, that it is
  Free Software, that is  public domain, shareware, freeware, cardware
  or  whatever,  must  become,  if  not just  illegal,  impossible  to
  realize. 



5 First examples - Magazines that distribute Free Software

The  first example  of  the  application of  this  law regarding  Free
Software has appeared with magazines that distribute CDROMs containing
GNU/Linux distributions. These publications, since the approval of the
law have begun  to put stamps on the  distributed CDs, evidently after
being advised  by a  lawyer.  These fact  has often involved  also the
increase of the cover price of cover of the magazines.  



6 What we can do

The  first  and  immediate  action  that  the  Italian  Free  Software
community can manage is to one  to try to being invited in the writing
of the aforesaid implementing  regulation.  The first version, written
up like explained before, is sent back for several problems introduced
and therefore perhaps we are still  in time in order to participate to
a  second review,  hoping  to  help the  software  distributed not  in
"normal" ways, like  Free Software but also others  like public domain
and shareware.

This action is actually managed by the Rome Linux User Group. 

Second, more obvious but also more  difficult action is to act so that
the  new  parliament  radically  modifies this  law,  recognizing  the
importance  of Free Software,  since Italy  does not  have practically
some  productive  ability  as   far  as  software  coming  from  great
corporations. 



Notes 

(1) In  Italy exist  many relatively  independent police  forces, with
	different task;  as an  example the Financial  police is  the body
	that controls  the financial crimes and therefore  also the crimes
	connected  to  the  copyright,  while  the Mail  Police  works  on
	everything that regards telecommunications, and therefore also the
	Internet.

(2) Spiegazione di penitanterietes

(3) In Italy it's possible, indeed  is a common practice, to emanate a
	law without  the regulation which make it  effective, sending back
	the  task to  write up  this regulation  to  commissions purposely
	named and  composed not only  from parliamentarians but  also from
	representatives of the categories interested to the law.

(4) During the  convention of  Rome has emerged  enough clearly  in an
	participation of  SIAE representative  Mr.  Agoglia, who  has more
	times asserted  that "the sense  of the law  is all in a  issue of
	public order because we must succeed to trace the path made by the
	software from the producers in order to arrive to the end users". 
	The technique  is old how much  the same commerce:  to control the
	roads that goods cover in order  to go from the production site to
	the  market  means  to  control  the  markets.   Which  are  these
	"producers" interested to know the road of their goods are easy to
	understand: surely  not who has by  now based the  own activity on
	the free  sharing of  their work and  their own knowledge,  on who
	draws the own source of  money just from the greater dissemination
	of his work. 
	All those who do not distribute what they make with free licences.

(*) Note  for the english  version: in this  document we will  use the
	italian word "lucro"  because we didn't find an  english word with
	the same  meaning. So "lucro" will  be for italian  word lucro and
	"profit" for "profitto".
