 Hi!

 We are very pleased to hear that you want to help the FSF
Europe.  Every little bit helps promoting Free Software and its
philosophy.

 Currently the core team is very busy organizing the legal steps
associated with setting up the FSF Europe (if you take a look at
the maling list archives you will see that this is not as easy as
we would prefer it to be). 

 We are very actively gathering information about the situation 
of Free Software in every European country, however. Examples of 
things we would like to hear about are:  schedules of events
related to  Free Software, the tendency and actions regarding
software patents,  the names and coordinates of officials,
newspapers, columnists and  non-profit associations involved in
Free Software or intellectual property as well as possible groups
that might be fit to become associated to the FSF Europe.

 Promoting the Free Software philosophy is very much a matter of
contact, cooperation and information. With your help and all
the people you can convince to do the same, the FSF Europe will 
be able to more effectively further Free Software.

 If you haven't done so already, we suggest that you subscribe
to  the FSF Europe mailing lists at http://mailman.fsfeurope.org
and  take a look at the archives to inform yourself on what has
been discussed already.

 There are also a few concrete tasks you could become active on,
if you want. 

 1.) Web pages.  If you want to contribute by building the FSF
Europe web pages, you can export them to your own computer and
modify them to improve or add what you have in mind. See  the
page https://savannah.gnu.org/cvs/?group_id=53 for technical 
details. When you've modified the pages, generate a patch and
upload it at  https://savannah.gnu.org/patch/?group_id=53. It
will be reviewed and shortly integrated if we agree that it is a
useful addition.  If you plan to contribute on a regular basis we
can provide you with  a protected access that allows you to
modify the pages by yourself.

 2.) Various public tasks. You can follow the current tasks of
the FSF
Europe at the URL https://savannah.gnu.org/pm/?group_id=53.
Don't  hesitate to suggest new subjects. If you want to be
actively involved in  the task management, we can grant you the
necessary rights to do so.

 3.) Donations. There is a bank account that can be used for
donations if time is of the essence. If possible we would like to
ask you to wait until the FSFE has an official donation bank
account. The FSFE will seek to achieve charitable status, so
donations will be tax-deductible whenever possible. 

 Discussions should take place on the mailing lists mentioned
above. All  information that you would like to tell the FSFE in
private can be sent to team@fsfeurope.org.

