Loic Dachary

Random notes taken during Symposium on use of open source software
in EU public administrations

http://147.29.81.19/Indis35Prod/doc/235
----------------------------------------------------------------------

       Opening Speech.

       M. Finetti responsible IDA.

       IDA promotes the exchange of informations between administrations
and interopability. The implementation of a single market impose huge
data exchange and that is where IDA comes into play.

       24ME budget of IDA. Low although it's very important. IDA provides
guidelines and solutions. Developped a catalog of generic services that
includes internet tools, groupware tools, electronic signatures. IDA
takes a leading role in the online governement activity. Created the portal
of the EU administration. Projects in IT security. And finaly the promotion
of Open Source software.

       IDA has to look for the the best oportunities to solve problems and
place the OSS at the same level as the other softwares.

       E. Liikanen

       Key issues in European IT :
       - Europe must keep the lead in mobile communications.
         The technology is not ready yet. We must have a strict policy
	 to keep the leadership. We must prevent the fragmentation of
	 the market.
       - SME going online. They are building up their information system.
         B&B will be the 2002 phenomenon but SME will take the lead.
       - E-Governement. A lot of pilot projects but actual projects are
         rare, even in the US. Broad in vision, short in action. How can
	 we actually move the government online ? So that everything will
	 be online so that people can actually focus on their work. For
	 everyone including mayors etc. IDA is very important in this area
	 I'm going to see Linus at transmetta. There is a growing recognition
	 in the OSS. Already in local countries. This moves to Europe and
	 the symposium today is answer to this call. Part of the debate
	 (Nice). Fight OSS Free Software in French it's solved by the
	 Logiciel Libre (sic).

       There is a big market opportunity. How reliability, transparency
efficiency can be achieve. Efficency : countradictory results. Desktop not
clear, server ok. Transparency is essential, users must be able to provide
feedback. As E-governement becomes an issue the transparency is essential.
Must be open for verification. They must be able to know how their votes
are counted. E-vote is a big issue but for consultations it's the same
problem. Reliability (stability) : OSS concern for security. OSS allows
to find bugs and security holes. But reliability has a political dimension.
The more government depends on IT, discontinued products is a problem.
Interoperability is also an issue. Standards and their documentation are
essential.
	We have to take in account future members ability to come in the
IT world created by Europe. The OSS development model already helped a lot.
There is a lot to learn from this.
        How can you guarantee the non-fragmentation of the OSS ? When ESR
wrote Cathedral it was unclear that it has an economic reality. But now
major actors are taking the train of OSS.

        Questions:

	Loic Dachary: How do you legaly secure the Free Software ?

	OSS encourages inovation. We open concertation on software patents.
More that 1000 response. Finished in April/Mai. Europe has no patents , US
has a lot. Venture capital ask how many patents do you have ?

        N. Pettiaux: Interoperability : how do you push standards
	             Lack of transparency in the process that comes after
		     the consultations, some light on this ?

        Answer : ask to standard organisation to make an effort. Transparency:
	         you can read the answers. The commission is responsible for
		 handling. It will be translated in 11 languages. Can we
		 reconcile all these different opinions. I'm sure all
		 opinions are heard.


       M. Finetti responsible IDA.

       E-Europe initiative aims at advance Europe to lead online
knowledge.  We have to take advantage of this symposium to focus on
this. Kind of red-line.

       B. schnittger

       OSS : Legal issues + Cost Issues must be taken in account during
this presentation.

       E. Troles: KBST driving forces in OSS german
governement. Organised a 3 days to explain OSS to german
government.

	    Technical guy. Speach in German. I brought my 1/2 OSS software
machine (?). I wear two hats (official in government) I'm a citizen of the
EU. The citizen is important espcialy when they have a European feeling.
Risks which I see in OSS as a technical person. The technical EU plan.
Objectives of the German government. Then some measures taken by the
German governement and future plans for 2001.

             Historical background. Unix 69... bla . Political dimension
of OSS. Mr Liikanen calls for the OSS. But at 1999 Berlin gave a speech
focused on security. The ministry of interior went to CEBIT in 99 and
was fully informed on OSS. In KBST 22000 circular (using Logiciel Libre)
we present LL as an alternative. I-Love-You virus cause problems some
damage DOS. 8 June workshop, 7 June judgement of Microsoft. And that
really set the future. End of historical overview.

       I summarized what happend last week. The bundestag talked about
OSS. Major point is that they presented the advantages of OSS. Tried to
make a decision on this (?). No vote against and the motion went to the
commity (me: did not understand what was the subject).

	The risks. Changes in ???. In Europe we have no patents. But
restrictions will occur if we allow patents. Be caution in using this.
Encryption is a risk : where security is important and we don't want
to depend on foreign software. The DECSS issue, country codes on each
DVD. This is no good. We should not have the OSS bankrupcy although
the IT market is going down. Many OSS firms bankrupt. But when you have
the source code you do not depend on them.


        Strategy business. A company may discontinue the support of their
operating system. This is not acceptable for Government organisation.
You don't have to wait for the next services updates. You can fix mistakes,
do maintainance and pay various companies to do it. We should be careful
that standards can be used in 20 and 30 years.
        Viruses. Not happen because do not attract virus makers. E-governement
is a risk for OSS (???). It must not be proprietary software because depends
on a technology that is built by another country.

         (Aigrain : should be called the the document of the European
Group made by me and other).

         The most important document. eu.connecta.it DG information society.
The paper describes very important issues. For lawyers it's important. Market
priorities, no black boxes, quality needs. If the quality is not enough the
product is not shipped.
	 Action plan : Cheap faster internet. Electronic signatures are
necessary also. Don't invest in products only also invest in people. Story
about his daughters, teachers (me: don't get the point :-} Use of the
internet by administration is pushed by governments. People have to pay
to get information that is not on the internet. Information should be made
available. OSS can provide that choice.

	 European initiatives. When something comes from Europe it's
applied in countries. In OSS it's different it was done from bottom to
top. Ojectives of the government. Bundestag decided that OSS should be
pushed and implemented by german administrations (see above). The actual
implementation is distributed among various ministry (justice, finance,
research). They are all involved.

	 What the federal government actually did. Expert congress on
software patents. Taken seriously. Made very clear that patents could
be a break on this. On the Unix system (still have the unix user group)
developped projects in the past. GPG developped for mail.
Activity in open groups e.g. Linux Tag represented in Brussels last year.
Economic minister came along and open the event. (talk about LinuxTag
and Linux Kongress).

         Interior ministry. Document that point alternatives of OS which
have qualities. OSS has become economically viable. After Microsoft
judgement workshop in germany open by state secretary. We've produced a
tool. Workshop produced a lot of foundings. The suggestion was that
OSS should be used in pilot projects in all projects. To prove that
OSS can be used. We recommend standards but some de-facto standards are
proprietary. We must use the internet to develop standards. In the server
fields OSS is becoming popular. IT experts must be better informed. Going
to have a training program.

         Differences between administrations. They will all use OSS.
(Various examples of OSS usage).

	 Projects: berlios.de
	 Expert center of OSS bridge functions between users and developpers.
Std environments for developpers and users. We want to setup pilot projects.
We have BSI call for tender (?) equip 10 workstations with OSS. The federal
agency for political training said that they will use OSS software. (more
example of future usage).

	 Arguments against OSS and for OSS : www.kbst.de

-------       B. schnittger

       Document that match available OSS + needs. Secret and will be
released.

-------       Jean Pierre Laisné.

       AFUL is the name of a french speaking association. Not only france
but all french speaking countries. Not a fan group. We are looking for
efficiency. We are focusing on freedom and push governements.

       Three cases : US, French, England
       What is important in IT
       Benefits for companies and users

       City of Garden Grove is a Californian city. The county was bankrupt.
In 93 they looked into networked structure to connect 600 users. They wanted
to modernize. They decided to replace their old machines by small PC machines
and moved all their information system in it. They had authentification, mail,
http. It worked. It was my first experience approaching linux.

       England: insurance company 250 branches, each branch has a Linux
machines and they need to be interconnected. The IT director did very good.
It works and he was promoted. They are growing their network.

       France: administrations. DGI (income taxes administration). 850
servers on an Intranet. A special linux distribution was made for them.
The money concern was the motive. Pentium + Apache + Linux. Now there are
plans to use the same architecture on the client part.

       Linux = Architectural change. Culture Ministry, Schools. Should the
educational system promote the system of only one company ? For the military
the open aspect of OSS is important. All the systems have to communicate
and we need an open communications. If we build software without granting
access to it, it collapses at the first tough spot. The communication
standards are essential because they sustain the software.

       Independant groups promote standards (w3c) the linux standard group
is working to build a base that prevents split/branch.

       Benefits of OSS. Software costs. 15% capital support,
administration 14%, end user operations 50%, capital cost 21% (license
?). (Source: Gartner Group). Points : Independence /Security /Control
of Costs (acquisition/TCO/Exit)/Control of Change).
       Security is provided at every level by OSS, you can install an
IP filter on the single desktop.
       The exit cost is always high (change everything when you change
your software provide). With free software you do not depend on a single
company and this is less an issue). You have alternatives that do *not*
require to change your whole information system.

       Market. The market is not big. Little companies take the lead and
will bring inovation. It's important to support local companies.

       When you work with the free software community. You can work on
network or people next to you. In school there is a linux user group nearby.
It's helpfull for proximity support. For me linux / free software create
jobs. The plumber of 2001 who comes to fix my computer because he has
access to the internal.s
       Startups do use linux to do their job. In schools ingineers do use
linux. Because they chose it they love it.
       All this is an opportunity for all actors to challenge the industry.

       Local government : www.illico.org

       It's crucial if you want to build the free software market you must
be able to help small companies and not make them wait three years to be
paid (!).

       CDROM demo linux to introduce linux to non linux user. I give you
a CD you give me a bizness card.

       Free Software is a huge trends in the industry.

-------------       J.J. Munoz

       Use of libre software in spanish administration.
Give the four freedoms definitions of free software. Governement in
madrid, 100 buildings all over the country. 30 to 100 people and we
wanted a solution for all of them. (List of too fast to follow technical
requirements such as backups, reinstallation, remote access to disks).
Limited budget.
	Why use free software. License price was a point, I don't
deny it. The most important is that we wanted to adapt it on our needs.
The most critical part was the server, work well, reliable ... with linux.
Chose debian and you just chose what you need. You can get rid of the
rest. We had to tune the kernel. Must be very carefull. Remote modification
of the kernel is hard. Automatic creation of users backups was also
important.
        We need a stable version (not the last one). Standard hardware must
be used. Other solutions considered and abandonned for technical or
availability reasons (Microsoft or Sun Cascade). Tried Samba instead but
was not released. The Nisigna works, a replacement for the msgina.dll
microsoft library.

	Nothing is free of charge. When you do not spend on licenses you
spend on assistance. The cost is more or less equal but not splitted in
the same way. Problem that most users do not know linux. Lot of user
groups. Only few people in big companies that know linux and only
big companies can get government contracts. Windows educated people
see software as a black box where in free software you can *understand*
why things happen.
        (tooooo fasssssst !-)

	When looking for a solution to a problem, most countries have the
same problems and they should all share informations.

---------        S. Gjedde

	Open Source

	The problem with windows is that we only have one alternative, we
also have security problemes. IT was not interstin in the past and now
we realize that we have a lot of data in our computer. We always want the
data available. The government tried to calculated how many millions
(out of battery)

------- P. Pflaging 

Magistrature de viene. 62 000 employees. 3 large ISP. FreeBSD & Linux 
and windows NT. 300 local networks linked thru fiber optics. 10 000 PC
with windows 95 / NT. 700 notebooks. 4500 printers.

Unlike german cities, vienna focuses not only on basic infrastrcuture
but also with other administrations. Anthing that has to do with transport.
No more details but a very broad fields. More or less every bizness have
to be dealt with. 

Why OSS : OS (freebsd or linux), administration servers (today in
the field of adminsitration our servers run 24h a day, all this is using
free software with very fee exceptions), base services (the same as previous,
the complete range such as http servers, distributions mechanism, DHCP, DNS). 
For network and software development we use open software. 

For the time being we have 200 file servers used by windows PC. The
file server uses Samba and NFS. Some code is used to get access control
list. 2 TB of capacity and 1200 users on these machines. Large numbers.
They can stard word from the file server. For administration and monitoring
with use Apache, GNU & Perl scripts. Makes administration easier. 

On firewall we wrote our own. We offer firewall & ISP to other administrations.
Complex configuration and that's why we found usefull to write our own
firewall. 18OMb connexion. Typically 18 servers running with squid, apache
in configurable. The firewall was published. We use Kerberos V. 
OpenSSL for PKI.

E-Vienna we pushed for non-proprietary standard just because we have a lot
of suppliers. They use Cobol applications. We did XML DTD, we use RFC
protocols. We comply to the PKI relevant RFC. We developped free software
ourselves and we publish it. The prefered platform is Perl / C. We want
to use ldap but it's currently Sun RPC based. We have XML based tools, this
will become free software. 

Experiences: ten years of experience show that support is better, with
the help of internet. Leads to better acceptance. OSS requires higher
skills to evaluate solution. You need at least one or two C
programmers that can actually read the code. OSS made it easier to
install multi platform integration and coexistence with legacy
systems, few if none commercial companies offer this. Price is also a
concern of course. Hardware is cheaper because only PCs. 

Not every piece of OSS is good. Selection involves finding out the 
language in which it is written. It can just stop us because we need
programmers able to deal with the language. System administrators to judge
the scalability. Fight with legal departement. Agree that no support but
they agree that we can give the code back. Everything we do as software
should be given back. It's an ethical policy that we should all use. At
the same time the people are gratefull for the code and you don't need
to maintain patches. 

We want this code to be prepared so that it can be published. That's been
general practice. Not easy but since two years it has a good effect on
the quality of code. This also has an economic effect. If everything can
be used as open source, it may spread and help the industry as a whole.

Conclusion. OSS is good for large organisations. Sightly higher skills
in IT field. Market monitoring on the internet. Move away from the traditional
way : companies come to present software, go and get it. 

(well spoken, someone definitely wise and advised).

------ Nicolas Pettiaux

New appointed it manager for belgium ministry. I do proposal. I'll sketch
the ideas. Some of the needs of IT technologies are not specific to government.
Need to preserve the information system. The public administration has to
guarantee that the information is available to the public, now and in the
future. I'll then talk about open standards, protocols. 

Needs of public IT. Guarantees information access: setup and maintainance
has to be minimal cost. 

The perenity of the document, the structure of the documents and the
format of the document have to be preserved. Using open standards is
the key solution. The standard must be controled by a public institution.

Law proposals in various countries tried to imposed the use of open 
standards. In france it's done. In Belgium it's in progress, 5/6 political
groups support this motion. It does not threaten the proprietary companies.

Protocols: we are using open protocols (email : pop/smtp/imap used only).

In the information system there is client and server. In the server 
critical information is stored. 

(Some words about patents) : it's a granted monopoly.

------ Søren Roug
EIONET's Experiences with Open Source

Facilitate the collection of information related to environment. The
information is centralized and dispatched. EIONET has other tasks such 
as documentation. Each national focal point and topic center (may be
specialized in lakes, soils). Although each have an autonomous platforms.
There are 40 platforms, one in each country. They use data exchange modules.
They use them to syntax check before sending them to the next focal point. 

Example: A website. We have a database driven website with some content
we collected and we want to produce a web site. It was outsourced and we
have to pay for this. We don't have the source code despite the fact that
we owned the binary. Because it contains proprietary parts. We cannot
migrate it to another platform. We always need new features, we only have
one place to go because nobody else but the original developper has the 
source code. And since they only have a limited amount of developers we
have to wait and they set the price to whatever they like. 

We also had problems with support services. Without the access to the
source code a third party have to go to the original source code. We
must have a support contract with the original author, even if it's only
to get access to the source. We are trapped. 

What's the solution. We simply decided to release everything we have
on our web site. It's not that simple but that's the spirit. The
benefits is that it gives competition when we need new features. It
makes it possible for other companies to find and study the sources. Some
developpers become litterate. We created a competition instead of a
monopoly. We also gained the ability to distribute the software without
fee to the 40 other points that exist.

Once publication under Open Source, what are the rules. The community
comes with three license GPL. It say you cannot do commercial (Aigrain 
yells, fixed mistake). What happens if the software becomes commercial
and is better (BSD) and we have to buy it back. MPL you can sell it
but not as closed source. And this is what you want. 

How do we do in practice ? We use tools for cooperative work. CVS and
message board to reduce conflicts. Someone in charge of merging
contributions.

Conclusion. We have to release the software we owned, despite the fact
that we own the intellectual rights. When it was not possible we had
to simply drop the software. We had to fight with companies that tend
to forget some terms of the contract. Some licenses did put some 
restrictions on the license terms in order to recontruct dependency. 

----------

Questions: 

- ? from european commission. Widely accepted that linux good on the
server side. In the school : why not OSS software in school. Most 
presentations were 

- Ministry of development in France: comment: not only what Open Source
can do for administration but the opposite. What about legal aspects ? 
How can it be done for administrations to release software they own.

- Loic Dachary: I'd like to stress that the legal aspect is indeed a
very important one. We saw that various administrations use various
license sometime for bad reasons. There is clearly a lack of guidelines
in the administration to find the way to the proper license. And this
a field where it's very important to distinguish between Open Source 
and Free Software. Open Source is a blurry definition where Free Software
has a strong legal basis and is well defined. I definitely think Free
Software can bring an answer to those legal questions because it has
a strong legal basis and is well defined.

Answers

Desktop:

- Nicola Pettiaux: it's possible to use free software on desktop. (longer
but cut)
- Jean-Pierre Laisné: 4 000 users will be using linux (in the example I
gave). Then children will be using linux in schools. When you see that
a company can put 15M$ in an encyclopedia just to keep the children under
the proprietary product. Can we compete with that ? 
- Bernard Lang: Regarding Schools teaching products and teaching products.
Schools should be using various competing products. Desktop : frequent 
question (office suite, word processor, spreadshit). We have StarOffice
it can do. But when people exchange documents it becomes a problem. Its
an issue of full compatibility. We need open standards. I don't care if
you buy proprietary or open source or free software, the only thing that
matters is : does it do the job. XML is *NOT* a data exchange format. 
It's good that administrations release all products in Open Source or
Free, mainly because they have not .

- Danemark ?? - We must pay for the development. We have to remember
that. Someone told me that they will never do business with a company
that do not make profit. The biggest cost is to sit behind the desk,
not the license. We have to remember that. We need to pay someone when
something goes wrong.  It's not against Open Software. What I like in
Open Software is the professional attitude. I want to do business with
people organizing themselves as professionals. We have to make sure the
Open Software people are professional. Last observations: certification
of products. Parallel with the internet ? Can open source take over like
internet took over IBM (?). It happened because internet is based on 
open standards. It happened because it had certification. We have to make
sure that everyone is working in parallel. There must be some regulation.

- Philippe Aigrain - Free Software never meant gratis. These remarks
points us to the difficulties of the switch from a domination
situation. If we could jump to an Open Source software environment it
would be ideal. But it's a complex problem to actually walk the
way. The staff has to be educated. They are used to proprietary
software. There are more products, more companies etc. It's more
complex to handle. The people currently in the administration will
stay and will have to change, how can you do that. What about the
budget ? You have to transfert from license costs to support costs,
training etc.. It's not going to be easy. You have to convince them
that it's worth doing. We have a huge problem with interoperability in
the transition period. We can rely on volunteers who are willing to suffer.
Part will be working on one system and some on another. There is not
regulatory solutions. The forefront is : do we have companies around
who are ready to provide the service we need ? They need to have the
financial surface and human resources. Certification: we know how it
is easy to produce the same errors, nevertheless we want the same 
re-assurances. It's a domain where Open Source has to evole. 

- Malcom Herbert Redhat - Open Source company and requirements to 
make profits. We have the expertise to provide technical support. Therefore
there are companies. In the UK the companies were too small to work with
the governement. RedHat will have more credibility. 

- Østergaard: disagree with (Danemark) : conservative attitude. You
should not sit and wait. Go out and find the right person for a
specific task. We already have the next generation. They will be more
than happy to program instead of fix bug. We need transparency,
interoperability and freedom of choice. We must emphasize : no
proprietary supported by only one company because it's a monopoly.
All public administrations must use free software free of patents. 

- B. Schnittger: no monopoly, we cannot blacklist anybody, we cannot say
we want this or that, we must consider everything and by legal obligation.

- JP Laisné. Redhat etc offer support. But new ways of working
togethers do we need the old rules ? The provider must not be the
ultimate source guaranteing that it works. The administrations must be
responsible for their choices and not put this to the provider. There
are de-facto monopolies.

- GNURU - Desktop : we only use linux based products. Easy for technical
people. When you show a KDE screen to someone they are instantly productive.

- Ministry of development in France: E-Governement will be a nightmare
if verion one is based on proprietary software. 

- Bernard Lange - (answer Danemark guy) : producing software cost, 
duplicating it cost nothing. People don't mind to use mathematics without
a cost but it costs to invent theorem. In the past great software was
made by research centers. I will never believe that a mathematical theorem
is accurate if the proof is secret, I will assume it's booby trapped. 
Research in computational linguistic. All the research done is proprietary
at present. And the field is not progressing as fast as it should. Also
private company think it's a pity !


------ Till & Axel

Axel:
-----

Idependant legal institute. We look around the legal issues related to
Free Software and Open Source. I'll sketch out the main issues. 

Legal issues on technical points tend to stay behind the technical work.
No judgement yet. This issue now become current and the expert discussion
started. Good for us and we can refer to publications. Three legal questions

a copyright law
b competition law
c liability

Patent realy is a policy issue and not a legal issue at present.

a) German law. Good news: we've been looking for issues. It's ok.
What about Europe. The 92 directive harmonize these issues. Software
is a copyrighted work. The author has the copyright and usage depends
on approval of the author. License are so important. Only what is allowed
in the license can be applied and taken in account.
All OSS software allow reproduce, (all desktop), change and adapt, 
distribute. All this are necessary for a software to be called free. 
Eg linux. The GPL puts a binding : all modifications are GPL. You must
provide the freedom. BSD you don't need. It's not free software. 
A problem we have in Europe. Making the software available. Public
domain is possible in the US. But in Europe it's different you have
"use rights". The idea is to protect from abusive contracts. 

b) competition law. Can a public authority actively develop free software ?
Not only use it ? Are there competition problem. You must make a distinction.
Not use : production. What happens if it leaves the administration ? Give
back ? There are areas which needs to be looked at. For instance an authority
buys a pencil and it never leaves. The administration will really compete 
with the software companies. In the german law it's restricted. A typical
case is if the public authority competes with encryption software by
publishing it. The german competition law judge might judge that it's 
not acceptable. 

Till:
-----

European level Article 27 in the ? treaty. Consumer & suplier of free
software (example vienna & dev encyclopedia). In principle the treaty
forbids this. Since Open Source software is an economic
activity. Don't focus just on linux or Open Source there are a lot of
firms that provide both proprietary and free software. Drivers as free
software provided by a a company. Now if the public authority wants to
develop the driver which can be used by the firm you indeed help the 
firm. Article 87-3: ok if general interest software.

c) liability law
You take a demo CD back home and the PC breaks. Who's liable ? Who
provides a guarantee if the software does not work properly ? On a
CD you have 200 programs the copyright holder and ask for liability
for the use of the software. Disclaimer on the back of the CD. And you
can find that in some license. Is it legal ? GPL says you have to 
provide the guarantee (???). All exclusions of liabily are effictive in the
US. Under german law it's not effective. Why ? It's prohibited. 
When you give a CD there is an implicit "Gift Contract" and this applies.
Same if you load a software from a server. If a firm or a company develop
the software the liability may be extented a lot, it's much less when 
an individual distributes software. Liability for intent *cannot* be
excluded. 

A few words about the institute. www.ifross.de. English / French. Free
documentation center will be setup. Part of the berlios.de environment. 

(You will miss the last questions :-P It's 5pm and I'm out of gas).
