Georg C.F. Greve
President, Free Software Foundation Europe

Curriculum vitae (long):

 Born 10. March 1973, Georg Greve has a classic scientific background
 as "Diplom" Physicist with biophysics, physical oceanography and
 astronomy as minor fields of study. His interdisciplinary diploma
 thesis was written in the field of nanotechnoloy at the computer
 science faculty of the University of Hamburg.

 Software development was part of his life since he was 12 years old
 and besides a first publication of a program in a professional
 journal in 1991, it partly financed his studies when he managed the
 software development to evaluate SQUID-sensor data in the
 biomagnetometic laboratory in the University hospital of Eppendorf
 (UKE) in Hamburg, Germany.

 In 1993 he came in touch with Free Software and GNU/Linux. Being
 European speaker for the GNU Project since 1998, Georg Greve at this
 time also began writing the "Brave GNU World," a monthly column on
 Free Software published in the German Linux-Magazin and other
 magazines worldwide, as well as the internet in up to 10 languages.

 In early 2001, he initiated the Free Software Foundation Europe
 (FSFE, FSF Europe), the first Free Software Foundation outside the
 United States of America and the only transnational Free Software
 Foundation so far. Construction and coordination of FSFE as European
 non-governmental organisation, as well as its integration and
 coordination in global context was the focus of his work in the past
 years.

 The range of activities spanned areas like technology, politics,
 society, and economy as well as classical management. Among other
 things, Georg Greve was invited as an expert to the "Commission on
 Intellectual Property Rights" of the UK government or represented the
 coordination circle of German Civil Society during the first phase of
 the United Nations (UN) World Summit on the Information Society
 (WSIS) as part of the German governmental delegation; he als
 furthered networking the Civil Society working groups on European
 level as well as for the thematic working group on Patents,
 Copyrights, Trademarks (PCT) and Free Software.



Curriculum vitae (short):

 Born 10. March 1973, Dipl.-Physicist Georg Greve has a classic
 scientific background with an interdisciplinary diploma thesis in
 nanotechnology at the University of Hamburg.

 A software development since his 12th year, Georg Greve came in touch
 with GNU/Linux and Free Software around 1993 and became European
 speaker for the GNU Project in 1998. Since this time he has been
 writing the "Brave GNU World," a monthly column about Free Software,
 which is published in several magazined as well as the on the
 internet in up to 10 languages.

 In early 2001 Georg Greve initiated the founding of the Free Software
 Foundation Europe (FSFE, FSF Europe), the construction and
 coordination of which has kept him busy on European and global level
 in past years.

 Within these activites between technology, politics, society, and
 economy, Georg Greve was for instance invited as an expert to the
 "Commission on Intellectual Property Rights" of the UK government and
 participated to the first phase of the United Nations (UN) World
 Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) on behalf of the German
 coordination circle of Civil Society within the German governmental
 delegation. 
